# The CAP FAQ

    Version 1.0, May 9th 2013
    By: Henry Robinson / henry.robinson@gmail.com / @henryr
<pre><a href="http://the-paper-trail.org/">http://the-paper-trail.org/</a></pre>

## 0. What is this document?

No subject appears to be more controversial to distributed systems
engineers than the oft-quoted, oft-misunderstood CAP theorem. The
purpose of this FAQ is to explain what is known about CAP, so as to
help those new to the theorem get up to speed quickly, and to settle
some common misconceptions or points of disagreement.

Of course, there's every possibility I've made superficial or
completely thorough mistakes here. Corrections and comments are
welcome: <a href="mailto:henry.robinson+cap@gmail.com">let me have
them</a>.

There are some questions I still intend to answer. For example

* *What's the relationship between CAP and performance?*
* *What does CAP mean to me as an engineer?*
* *What's the relationship between CAP and ACID?*

Please suggest more.

## 1. Where did the CAP Theorem come from?

Dr. Eric Brewer gave a keynote speech at the Principles of Distributed
Computing conference in 2000 called 'Towards Robust Distributed
Systems' [1]. In it he posed his 'CAP Theorem' - at the time unproven - which
illustrated the tensions between being correct and being always
available in distributed systems.

Two years later, Seth Gilbert and Professor Nancy Lynch - researchers
in distributed systems at MIT - formalised and proved the conjecture
in their paper “Brewer's conjecture and the feasibility of consistent,
available, partition-tolerant web services” [2].

[1] http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~brewer/cs262b-2004/PODC-keynote.pdf
[2] http://lpd.epfl.ch/sgilbert/pubs/BrewersConjecture-SigAct.pdf

## 2. What does the CAP Theorem actually say?

The CAP Theorem (henceforth 'CAP') says that it is impossible to build
an implementation of read-write storage in an asynchronous network that
satisfies all of the following three properties:

* Availability - will a request made to the data store always eventually complete?
* Consistency - will all executions of reads and writes seen by all nodes be _atomic_ or _linearizably_ consistent?
* Partition tolerance - the network is allowed to drop any messages.

The next few items define any unfamiliar terms.

More informally, the CAP theorem tells us that we can't build a
database that both responds to every request and returns the results
that you would expect every time. It's an _impossibility_ result - it
tells us that something we might want to do is actually provably out
of reach. It's important now because it is directly applicable to the
many, many distributed systems which have been and are being built in
the last few years, but it is not a death knell: it does _not_ mean
that we cannot build useful systems while working within these
constraints.

The devil is in the details however. Before you start crying 'yes, but
what about...', make sure you understand the following about exactly
what the CAP theorem does and does not allow.

## 3. What is 'read-write storage'?

CAP specifically concerns itself with a theoretical
construct called a _register_. A register is a data structure with two
operations:

* set(X) sets the value of the register to X
* get() returns the last value set in the register

A key-value store can be modelled as a collection of registers. Even
though registers appear very simple, they capture the essence of what
many distributed systems want to do - write data and read it back.

## 4. What does _atomic_ (or _linearizable_) mean?

Atomic, or linearizable, consistency is a guarantee about what values
it's ok to return when a client performs get() operations. The idea is
that the register appears to all clients as though it ran on just one
machine, and responded to operations in the order they arrive.

Consider an execution consisting the total set of operations performed
by all clients, potentially concurrently. The results of those
operations must, under atomic consistency, be equivalent to a single
serial (in order, one after the other) execution of all operations.

This guarantee is very strong. It rules out, amongst other guarantees,
_eventual consistency_, which allows a delay before a write becomes
visible. So under EC, you might have:

    set(10), set(5), get() = 10

But this execution is invalid under atomic consistency.

Atomic consistency also ensures that external communication about the
value of a register is respected. That is, if I read X and tell you
about it, you can go to the register and read X for yourself. It's
possible under slightly weaker guarantees (_serializability_ for
example) for that not to be true. In the following we write A:<set or
get> to mean that client A executes the following operation.

    B:set(5), A:set(10), A:get() = 10, B:get() = 10

This is an atomic history. But the following is not:

    B:set(5), A:set(10), A:get() = 10, B:get() = 5

even though it is equivalent to the following serial history:

    B:set(5), B:get() = 5, A:set(10), B:get() = 10

In the second example, if A tells B about the value of the register
(10) after it does its get(), B will falsely believe that some
third-party has written 5 between A:get() and B:get(). If external
communication isn't allowed, B cannot know about A:set, and so sees a
consistent view of the register state; it's as if B:get really did
happen before A:set.

Wikipedia [1] has more information. Maurice Herlihy's original paper
from 1990 is available at [2].

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linearizability
[2] http://cs.brown.edu/~mph/HerlihyW90/p463-herlihy.pdf

## 4. What does _asynchronous_ mean?

An _asynchronous_ network is one in which there is no bound on how
long messages may take to be delivered by the network or processed by
a machine. The important consequence of this property is that there's
no way to distinguish between a machine that has failed, and one whose
messages are getting delayed.

## 5. What does _available_ mean?

A data store is available if and only if all get and set requests
eventually return a response that's part of their specification. This
does _not_ permit error responses, since a system could be trivially
available by always returning an error.

There is no requirement for a fixed time bound on the response, so the
system can take as long as it likes to process a request. But the
system must eventually respond.

Notice how this is both a strong and a weak requirement. It's strong
because 100% of the requests must return a response (there's no
'degree of availability' here), but weak because the response can take
an unbounded (but finite) amount of time.

## 6. What is a _partition_?

A partition is when the network fails to deliver some messages to one
or more nodes by losing them (not by delaying them - eventual delivery
is not a partition).

The term is sometimes used to refer to a period during which _no_
messages are delivered between two sets of nodes. This is a more
restrictive failure model. We'll call these kinds of partitions _total
partitions_.

The proof of CAP relied on a total partition. In practice,
these are arguably the most likely since all messages may flow through
one component; if that fails then message loss is usually total
between two nodes.

## 7. Why is CAP true?

The basic idea is that if a client writes to one side of a partition,
any reads that go to the other side of that partition can't possibly
know about the most recent write. Now you're faced with a choice: do
you respond to the reads with potentially stale information, or do you
wait (potentially forever) to hear from the other side of the
partition and compromise availability?

This is a proof by _construction_ - we demonstrate a single situation
where a system cannot be consistent and available. One reason that CAP
gets some press is that this constructed scenario is not completely
unrealistic. It is not uncommon for a total partition to occur if
networking equipment should fail.

## 8. When does a system have to give up C or A?

CAP only guarantees that there is _some_ circumstance in which a
system must give up either C or A. Let's call that circumstance a
_critical condition_.  The theorem doesn't say anything about how
likely that critical condition is. Both C and A are strong guarantees:
they hold only if 100% of operations meet their requirements. A single
inconsistent read, or unavailable write, invalidates either C or
A. But until that critical condition is met, a system can be happily
consistent _and_ available and not contravene any known laws.

Since most distributed systems are long running, and may see millions
of requests in their lifetime, CAP tells us to be
cautious: there's a good chance that you'll realistically hit one of
these critical conditions, and it's prudent to understand how your
system will fail to meet either C or A.

## 9. Why do some people get annoyed when I characterise my system as CA?

Brewer's keynote, the Gilbert paper, and many other treatments, places
C, A and P on an equal footing as desirable properties of an
implementation and effectively say 'choose two!'. However, this is
often considered to be a misleading presentation, since you cannot
build - or choose! - 'partition tolerance': your system either might experience
partitions or it won't.

CAP is better understood as describing the tradeoffs you
have to make when you are building a system that may suffer
partitions. In practice, this is every distributed system: there is no
100% reliable network. So (at least in the distributed context) there
is no realistic CA system. You will potentially suffer partitions,
therefore you must at some point compromise C or A.

Therefore it's arguably more instructive to rewrite the theorem as the
following:

<pre>Possibility of Partitions => Not (C and A)</pre>

i.e. if your system may experience partitions, you can not always be C
and A.

There are some systems that won't experience partitions - single-site
databases, for example. These systems aren't generally relevant to the
contexts in which CAP is most useful. If you describe your distributed
database as 'CA', you are misunderstanding something.

## 10. What about when messages don't get lost?

A perhaps surprising result from the Gilbert paper is that no
implementation of an atomic register in an asynchronous network can be
available at all times, and consistent only when no messages are lost.

This result depends upon the asynchronous network property, the idea
being that it is impossible to tell if a message has been dropped and
therefore a node cannot wait indefinitely for a response while still
maintaining availability, however if it responds too early it might be
inconsistent.

## 11. Is my network really asynchronous?

Arguably, yes. Different networks have vastly differing characteristics.

If

* Your nodes do not have clocks (unlikely) or they have clocks that may drift apart (more likely)
* System processes may arbitrarily delay delivery of a message (due to retries, or GC pauses)

then your network may be considered _asynchronous_.

Gilbert and Lynch also proved that in a _partially-synchronous_
system, where nodes have shared but not synchronised clocks and there
is a bound on the processing time of every message, that it is still
impossible to implement available atomic storage.

However, the result from #8 does _not_ hold in the
partially-synchronous model; it is possible to implement atomic
storage that is available all the time, and consistent when all
messages are delivered.

## 12. What, if any, is the relationship between FLP and CAP?

The Fischer, Lynch and Patterson theorem ('FLP') (see [1] for a link
to the paper and a proof explanation) is an extraordinary
impossibility result from nearly thirty years ago, which determined
that the problem of consensus - having all nodes agree on a common
value - is unsolvable in general in asynchronous networks where one
node might fail.

The FLP result is not directly related to CAP, although they are
similar in some respects. Both are impossibility results about
problems that may not be solved in distributed systems. The devil is
in the details. Here are some of the ways in which FLP is different
from CAP:

* FLP permits the possibility of one 'failed' node which is totally
  partitioned from the network and does not have to respond to
  requests.
* Otherwise, FLP does not allow message loss; the network
  is only asynchronous but not lossy.
* FLP deals with _consensus_, which is a similar but different problem
  to _atomic storage_.

For a bit more on this topic, consult the blog post at [2].

[1] http://the-paper-trail.org/blog/a-brief-tour-of-flp-impossibility/
[2] http://the-paper-trail.org/blog/flp-and-cap-arent-the-same-thing/

## 13. Are C and A 'spectrums'?

It is possible to relax both consistency and availability guarantees
from the strong requirements that CAP imposes and get useful
systems. In fact, the whole point of CAP is that you
_must_ do this, and any system you have designed and built relaxes one
or both of these guarantees. The onus is on you to figure out when,
and how, this occurs.

Real systems choose to relax availability - in the case of systems for
whom consistency is of the utmost importance, like ZooKeeper. Other
systems, like Amazon's Dynamo, relax consistency in order to maintain
high degrees of availability.

Once you weaken any of the assumptions made in the statement or proof
of CAP, you have to start again when it comes to proving an
impossibility result.

## 14. Is a failed machine the same as a partitioned one?

No. A 'failed' machine is usually excused the burden of having to
respond to client requests. CAP does not allow any machines to fail
(in that sense it is a strong result, since it shows impossibility
without having any machines fail).

It is possible to prove a similar result about the impossibility of
atomic storage in an asynchronous network when there are up to N-1
failures. This result has ramifications about the tradeoff between how
many nodes you write to (which is a performance concern) and how fault
tolerant you are (which is a reliability concern).

## 15. Is a slow machine the same as a partitioned one?

No: messages eventually get delivered to a slow machine, but they
never get delivered to a totally partitioned one. However, slow
machines play a significant role in making it very hard to distinguish
between lost messages (or failed machines) and a slow machine. This
difficulty is right at the heart of why CAP, FLP and other results are
true.

## 16. Have I 'got around' or 'beaten' the CAP theorem?

No. You might have designed a system that is not heavily affected by
it. That's good.
